---
title: The Stranger Parable
date: 2015-08-04
categories: [ books ]
description: Reflections on Camus' book The Stranger.
---

After reading Albert Camus' *L'étranger* as my first French novel (the
language, unlike the concepts, is simple and elegant), I decided to read some
thoughts and reviews that others had written. Surprisingly, it seemed that my
reading of the work was substantially different from most others'. Only a small
part of this can be attributed to the difficulties of translating a French work
where the character of the prose plays an important role -- the overarching
plot and themes are still the same.

Where many seemed to find in Mersault a misunderstood atheist anti-hero or
something of the sort, and a critical message about social norms and the like,
my lasting impression was that of the contemporary archetype, immersed in a
sweltering passive nihilism -- partly hedonistic, but chiefly apathetic. After
the loss of sedentary values, after the *Entzauberung* of our perceived
reality, there is nothing. Only absurdity. Actions, and even ideas and thoughts
become meaningless and indifferent at best. Mersault comes to this very
realisation at the end of the book. This to me is the most interesting part --
before the last section, his thoughts and actions had been exclusively
deterministic. This is still the case at the end of the book, but in the
incredibly beautiful final section, he becomes self-aware, he gains the ability
to reflect on his own nihilism, thus transforming it from a passive and
apathetic nihilism into an active nihilism. Just as the universe is indifferent
to Mersault, Mersault who was previously only indifferent towards society and
temporality, now also becomes indifferent to the entire cosmos and his own
being. He embraces his own annihilation, even if it may only be conceptual.

I'd be very careful to not, like some, ascribe the values of Mersault or even
the inversion of his values, to Camus himself. While *L'étranger* is clearly a
parable, it seems to me that any moralistic interpretation, whether
relativistic or even anti-moralistic, is a grave error. Camus, I think, wants
us to reflect on the meaning of our own existence without judgement. The lack
of finality in the ending is not, I think, like some readers have suggested, an
invitation to the reader to decide for himself what Mersault's fate is. No, to
me it is a clear invitation as any to completely refrain from this, to not
judge either Mersault, his action, those surrounding him, the universe itself,
or ourselves, at all. We are invited to partake in his active nihilism, and to
judge only our own reflectiveness or lack thereof. To not find or discard hope,
but to transcend it. To act and think (thought itself being a form of action)
without desire, to become an active agent of a chaotically deterministic
universe. 
