---
title: Europa
date: 2015-06-01
categories: [ films ]
description: Reflections on Lars von Trier's film Europa.
---

Lars von Trier is a highly interesting contemporary character. Having only seen
one of his films so far (which I shall shortly leave some comments on below), I
am not much of an authority on the subject -- but reading about him and
watching some interviews, I find myself quite intrigued. Most notably he became
the center of attention at the Cannes film festival for some innocuous jokes
about being a nazi. The whole debacle was silly in many ways, and from an
external angle quite amusing. The interesting thing is how starkly it
illustrates the fact that in the postmodern society one can be a provocateur of
almost unlimited proportions, unless one manages to stick one’s hand in one of
the conveniently placed bear traps that litter the place.  Trier was promptly
banned from the festival, despite numerous attempts at apologizing for the
apparently tasteless character of his humour -- and while it would certainly
have been more satisfying had he actually assumed a more rigid role as a true
provocateur rather than being reduced to a snivelling apologizer after the
first gust, not much else was to be expected.  Trier is primarily an artist,
and while provocation is part of his resume, it is not the central act.

*Europa* is a very beautiful film about -- you guessed it -- Europe.  The plot
is constructed like a Matryoshka doll, with ever deeper aspects of the story
being interwoven with each other. Beneath a fictional story set in Germany
directly after the war, the very real significance of the historical period and
its consequences are vividly painted in a monochrome palette. The ever-present
allegory is the train, on which everything takes place. The train is Europa, or
Europe, and it follows closely the historical course of the continent. There is
also a ‘you’, who is being hypnotized, and this you is an incarnation of
Europe. The voice of Max von Sydow eerily describes the various stages that you
assume in a melancholic buildup to the inevitable *Untergang*. The film is in
many aspects quite surreal, and I think this is where its real strength lies --
there are a multitude of ways to interpret each event that occurs, but the
insanity that violently bubbles just beneath the surface of the caricatural
character of the Prussians is palpable. This madness is best depicted in the
main character, a pacifist American who has relocated himself to the collapsed
post-war Germany for humanitarian reasons. Gradually throughout the movie,
madness creeps up on him, and towards the end, as he is being manipulated and
forced to choose sides, he embraces nihilism entirely.

If I were to go into more detail, I would spoil the film too much, I think. But
it's a film that I can truly recommend -- Trier's masterful allegorical work is
illustrated by breathtaking scenes and an excellent soundtrack. It is a film
that should leave anyone with their heart in the right place deeply touched.
